# Identifying Housekeeping Genes in Human Hematopoietic Stem Cells
This repository contains the code used for the Final Degree Project (TFG) by Paula Vela at ESCI-UPF, conducted during an internship at the Bioinformatics Unit of the Josep Carreras Leukaemia Research Institute (IJC).

## Project description
This project identifies stable housekeeping genes in human haematopoietic stem and progenitor cells from different tissues and developmental stages using RNA-seq data. 433 candidate genes were selected based on their stable gene expression across tissue through the Coefficient of Variation and the Gini Index. These genes were used to normalize  gene expression for transcriptomic analysis. Noise correction through RUV improved the specificity in the enriched biological processes, showing that the use of validated HKGs improves the analysis making it more robust and interpretable.

## Abstract
Housekeeping genes (HKGs) are commonly used for transcriptomic normalization, but studies have shown that their expression can vary depending on the tissues and the conditions. In this study we identify stable HKGs in human haematopoietic stem and progenitor cells using bulk RNA-seq data from a variety of tissues and developmental stages (fetal liver, umbilical cord blood, adult bone marrow, yolk sac, and aorta-gonad-mesonephros). We identified 433 candidate HKGs based on the Coefficient of Variation and the Gini Index of their expression, and confirmed that they were associated with biological processes typically expected from housekeeping genes (e.g. translation, metabolism, cytoskeleton organization ). We tested their usefulness by performing differential expression analysis with removing unwanted variation (RUV) (e.g. to account for batch effects) using our selected HKGs as reference genes and compared the results with the same approach without RUV. In our comparisons - haematopoeitic stem cells vs dendritic cells and haematopoeitic progenitors vs endothelial cells - RUV improved the specificity of the functional analysis of the results, i.e revealing more HSCs generative functions and dendritic cell-specific differentiation, and haematopoeitic metabolic processes and endothelial-like features, respectively. Our findings support the validity and usefulness of our set of HKGs and provide a list of robust reference genes  for hematopoietic transcriptomic studies.

## Repository structure
- `scripts/`: All analysis scripts, including differential expression, gene stability selection, and PCA.
- `data/`:  Contains scripts used to download the raw RNA-seq data. You can access the dataset from GEO: [GSE233478](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE233478)
- `README.md`: You are here.
